Jacob Wrestles at Peniel
And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford
Jabbok.
And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until
the breaking of the day.
And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the
hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not
let thee go, except thou bless me.
And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for
as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast
prevailed.
And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And
he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he
blessed him there.
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel [the face of God]: for
I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted
upon his thigh.
Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank,
which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day; because he
touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.
Jacob and Esau Reconciled
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came,
and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto
Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.
And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah
and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.
 And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him: and they wept.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children, and
said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which
God hath graciously given thy servant.
Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and
they bowed themselves.
And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed
themselves.
And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And
he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.
And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy
sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen
thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast
pleased with me.
Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God
hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he
urged him, and he took it.
 And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go
before thee.
And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me; and if
men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant; and I will lead
on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the
children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.
And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that
are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the
sight of my lord.
So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him a house, and made
booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called
Succoth [booths].
 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the
land of Canaan, when he came from Padan-aram; and pitched his
tent before the city.
And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at
the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for a
hundred pieces of money.
And he erected there an altar, and called it El-Elohe-Israel [God the
God of Israel].
34
The Defilement of Dinah Avenged
And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land.
And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.
And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved
the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.
And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this
damsel to wife.

And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his
sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until
they were come.
And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to
commune with him.
And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and
the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had
wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s daughter; which thing
ought not to be done.
 And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son
Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to
wife.
And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us,
and take our daughters unto you.
And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell
and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as
ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:
and they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister
to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
but in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that
every male of you be circumcised;
then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your
daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become
one people.
But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we
take our daughter, and we will be gone.
 And their words pleased Hamor and Shechem Hamor’s son.
And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
delight in Jacob’s daughter: and he was more honorable than all the
house of his father.
And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city,
and communed with the men of their city, saying,
These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the
land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for
them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give
them our daughters.
Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to
be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised.
Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be
ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that
went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all
that went out of the gate of his city.
 And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that
two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took
each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the
males.
And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the
sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house, and went out.
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because
they had defiled their sister.
They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
and all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took
they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the
Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall
gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be
destroyed, I and my house.
And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with a harlot?
God Blesses Jacob at Beth-el
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Beth-el, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when
thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him,
Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and
change your garments:
and let us arise, and go up to Beth-el; and I will make there an altar
unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was
with me in the way which I went.
And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their
hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid
them under the oak which was by Shechem.
 And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons
of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel,
he and all the people that were with him.
And he built there an altar, and called the place El-beth-el [the God
of Beth-el]; because there God appeared unto him, when he fled
from the face of his brother.
But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath
Beth-el under an oak: and the name of it was called Allon-bachuth
[the oak of weeping].
And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram,
and blessed him.
And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name; and he called
his name Israel.
And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and
multiply: a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 